hey everyone lastly Montgomery again
episode 101 of the China history podcast
it's been a while since they had Sydney
rittenberg episode on September 25th too
much going on right now that's getting
in between me and getting these episodes
out I thought I'd start a little
overview of the history of Hong Kong
I've planned for a long time to do these
histories of Hong Kong Taiwan Macau and
straits Chinese so today I'm gonna stop
talking about it and just do it I don't
know how many episodes it will take but
this time we're gonna explore the
history of Hong Kong all the books I
found that cover Hong Kong history begin
in the 1840s with the opium war that's
not a Eurocentric way of looking at it I
don't know what is contrary to popular
belief the history of Hong Kong began
way before the Treaty of Nanjing I
remember during the nine years I lived
there that among the hundred or so
archaeological sites I remember there
were some that with history that went
back something like six thousand years
long before there was any Great Britain
or England for that matter the area has
been inhabited for thirty thousand years
in Hong Kong's
history as part of China dates back to
at least the Qin Dynasty and certainly
to the song now part of this story has
already been told in CHP episode six but
thirty one minutes 19 seconds hardly
does the opium war justice so in this
series we're gonna take a second long
look at the opium war and get into more
details
I have Julia Lovells book handy and that
will be a primo resource for when the
time comes
any local in Hong Kong will tell you one
of the main reasons for the dazzling
success of this place is of course the
Fung Shui when the earliest ancient
geomancer's got a load of this place
thousands of years ago they must have
thought they struct a mother lode that's
what lai boy he thought when he traveled
the length of China and set eyes on this
place like Buyi as he's known in
Mandarin lived his life during the last
decades of the northern song lai Booey
maybe he predicted this all along so
enthusiastic was he about what he saw in
this unique one-of-a-kind place with its
amazing valleys coves inlets harbors
hills and mountains who knew way back
when how valuable this place would be
and who could have predicted what a
pivotal role hong kong would play in the
history of 19th and 20th century china
time and again so I thought let's put
that good old Eurocentric version aside
and start at the beginning I had this
quick in-and-out trip to Hong Kong last
week and there was just enough down time
for me to head over to East Jim saw Joey
to go check out the Hong Kong Museum of
History it's like not even 2 bucks to
get in so check it out next time you're
there bring a fur coat and a muffler I
thought let's sit back and go to the
start of the beginning of the beginning
that all began 400 million years ago
yeah that's how far we're going back
today a record for the China history
podcast that's when the geological
evolution began that formed this amazing
land this time was known as the Devonian
period one of the six periods that make
up the Paleozoic era this is far back
because I think one could go as far as
the history of our planet goes you can
still see rock formations from this era
today when you visit Plover Cove up in
Tai Po as well as around bluff head and
around the northern Tolo channel at the
New Territories the rock formation known
as The Devil's fist in Wangchuck
chai is an example yeah I'm saying all
these places in my bad Cantonese if I
say Wong to geology no one's gonna know
what I'm talking about so throughout the
entirety of this series as long as it
ends up going I'm gonna stick to the
Cantonese pronunciation and all I can
say in advance to all my Kanto speakers
is dou em G well we know how the
Paleozoic period ends
started off good with the Cambrian
explosion plethora of life-forms come
into being and then it ended with the
Permian Triassic extinction event that
sort of killed off just about but not
quite all life on the planet on land
anyway and probably the sea - whatever
happened must have been pretty bad
because it took 30 million years for
life on earth to bounce back from that
when this happened the area where Hong
Kong is located was covered by a vast
shallow sea around 140 160 million years
ago we have the Jurassic period that saw
the lands and Hong Kong shaken by the
most violent volcanic eruptions and blew
all those a sh and lava above the ground
and it was these geological forces
created during that Jurassic period that
gave Hong Kong some of its most kick-ass
landscapes these rock formations that
were formed during this period make up
about half of Hong Kong you know it was
a few months ago I recall some company
or the Hong Kong government was doing
some surveying or something and they
chanced upon the remnants of this
extinct super volcano from like a
hundred and forty million years ago it
said it blew like 300 cubic miles or
something like that worth of Ash and
rock into the skies totally blanketing
Hong Kong hope that doesn't happen again
but not everything was blown out in
volcanoes and fissures in the Earth's
crust a lot of the molten rock cooled
below the surface and you know by
amazing geological forces ended up being
forced up above the surface and you know
this is mostly granite and other coarse
rocks and about 30% of the land in Hong
Kong was formed this way and then more
recently but still a good 100 million
years ago Hong Kong was a desert not
suitable for sustaining life on land
that's why the dinosaurs of the region
stayed up in Guangdong province and left
their fossils there for paleontologists
to dig up but Hong Kong no dinosaurs the
Cretaceous period of 50 to 80 million
years ago saw Hong Kong covered by a
wide shallow lake
then came the famous meteorite or comet
or whatever it was that caused the end
Cretaceous extinction event once again
life is destroyed on the planet as we
know it's including all the dinosaurs
this is the extinction event that did
them in but one thing that came out of
this event were the formation of these
massive salt formations and we'll see
once humankind makes their entree and
societies begin to organize its this
salt created during this period that
brings an economy to hong kong for the
first time salt was the oil business of
its day following the cretaceous period
we had the Cenozoic era lots of tectonic
plates shifting during this time
antarctica broke off and ended up at the
bottom of the planet
it was the erosion and geological forces
that happened during this time 60
million years ago that shaped much of
what we see today in Hong Kong the peak
included fast-forward to two million
years ago and were in the Ice Age the
last ice age was about 18,000 years ago
freezing cold because of all the ice the
sea level in Hong Kong was about a
hundred and thirty meters shallower than
it is today
and because the sea level was this low
the coastline of Hong Kong ran about a
hundred and twenty kilometres south of
where it is today these glaciers carved
out valleys and continued to sculpt the
landscapes of Hong Kong and then the Ice
Age ends the waters melt sea level rose
the valleys filled up with water and
voila that incredible and intricate
coastline and topography was created
that makes up Hong Kong Island Kowloon
the New Territories and roughly 260
Islands big and small go on Google Earth
if you've never done it before and check
it out from a few thousand meters up
pretty amazing after this last ice age
humans if you believe in evolution had
already evolved into Homo sapiens and
many of these hominid fossil remains
have been found in and around Hong Kong
and of course all over southern China
this would be the late upper
Paleolithic period anywhere from 10
50,000 years ago so folks are living in
and around Hong Kong at least as early
as this period well this isn't a podcast
about paleontology but let's just say
scattered all over parts of Hong Kong
were the same stone hand axes drills
spear heads arrowheads
choppers that you find wherever humans
gathered in any civilization in Asia
Africa in Europe you know dozens of
thousands of years ago there's plenty of
pottery that's been uncovered too
thankfully we have that if not for
pottery the first ever artificial
material that humankind ever produced
we wouldn't know half as much as we do
about these budding civilizations that
began to form pottery making in South
China and Hong Kong first began about
8,000 years ago the earliest
archaeologists began digging in Hong
Kong during the 1920s found proof of
life in and around Lantau Island
especially around Chek Lap Kok where the
airport is located there were also
plenty of relics found on Lamma Island
where we recently had that tragic
accident where 39 people lost their
lives pottery and other stone tools were
also uncovered into a moon and urine
long in the western new territories
there were textile fragments also dug
out of the ground near check Lok Lak
that are well over 3,000 years old and
rock carvings that are still visible and
can be seen in big wave Bay Hong Kong
Island and Wangchuk haand this is all
Bronze Age China in toto there are about
170 archaeological sites spread out
around Hong Kong who were these earliest
humans who inhabited parts of Hong Kong
and the adjacent area of southern China
these prehistoric people were probably
the yeah y-you II the yeah were spread
out across the three most southern
provinces of China Guangdong Guangxi and
you nut
these people not constrained by borders
that wouldn't exist for many thousands
of years were also spread out in
neighboring Vietnam in Mandarin we call
Vietnam you
and same character in Vietnamese this
characters pronounced
yet these yet people the important thing
to know was they weren't han people they
have their own distinct culture ways of
dressing rituals and language
collectively they are known as the by by
means means 100 so the hundred year the
best-known of the nine year of Guangdong
which Hong Kong is a geographical
appendage you also had the mean yet of
Fujian as well as the US State located
up in present-day Cho Chang the
descendants of these prehistoric and
ancient year people are today spread out
across southern China northern Vietnam
there they developed their distinct
culture but again they were not Han
people and the Han Chinese when they
locked horns with a urine in the South
they found them to be fierce uncivilized
and not to be messed with but nobody
told that to Qin Shihuang the mighty
Qing Emperor from whose name we got the
word China
he sent his armies down south in his
drive to unify the land and this is
exactly what he did he unified the south
and incorporated this southernmost
territory into his China he consolidated
his reach by setting up a military base
or a commander II as samaa Chen said you
know who he is he said of Qin Shih
Huang's armies quote in the South they
seize the land of the hundred tribes of
the ger and made of it kweilyn and Shang
provinces and the Lords of the
hundred-year bowed their heads hung
halters from their necks and pleaded for
their lives with the lowest officials of
the Qin we all know is big and bad as
Qin Shi Huang was he didn't have the
necessary staying power and when he went
so went to Qin we've covered this all
before in previous podcasts so he was
successful in bringing the south and all
these unit tribes into the Han Chinese
fold but when he died well you know what
happens happen in China happens
everywhere when the center breaks down
those at the fringe tried to reassert
themselves such a person was child paw
Commandant of nan hai the Jun
or Commander II that controlled southern
China including Hong Kong he rebelled
against the fading chin and set himself
up as emperor of the new nanyue kingdom
they hung in there for almost a century
203 to 111 BC cha-cha was successful in
unifying all the various European and it
was during his rule that Chinese culture
permeated into the south and made itself
at home and this blended with the best
that the year I had to offer and the
unique southern Chinese culture more and
more began to take shape
Chao halls progeny all surname Zhao paid
tribute to the Han Dynasty Emperor's and
became vassals of the Chinese emperor
things went well for a while but then
one day hon wu d decided to send a
hundred thousand troops south to put an
end to this kingdom down there during
this Nonya Kingdom period the jaws began
the work of assimilating there you have
people in their culture into the Han
Chinese world and after Han rule D put
an end to them the nine-year people and
their world was swallowed up by China
never to be heard from again no written
records survived to tell their side of
the story one thing's for sure the
Europe people may not have survived as a
race but strands of their DNA most
definitely attached itself to the whole
double helix that makes up the culture
of Guangdong province Hong Kong during
the Qin and Han dynasties was because of
its geographic location a fisherman's
paradise and thanks to the geological
goings-on during the Cretaceous period
of 50 to 80 million years ago salt was
plentiful - and business was booming and
guess what salted fish business wasn't
too bad either it maybe didn't seem like
all that much but from these most
humblest of beginnings I guess we could
say the Hong Kong economy more than 350
billions strong today was off and
running we know that Hong Kong was
populated during the Han Dynasty because
one day back in 1955
when the Hong Kong government was
leveling the side of a mountain and
Cheung sha Wan to build the Lecce hook
housing estate they stumbled upon a tomb
that was dated back to the time of the
Eastern Han so this alone proves that
Hong Kong history surely didn't begin
with the opium war so we can conclude
that it was at least during the Han
Dynasty that settlements first began to
appear in Hong Kong the next great
period for Hong Kong came around the 5th
and 6th centuries during the time of
upheaval known as the southern and
northern dynasties later the Jean
dynasty of the Jurchens these were the
times if you recall from past China
history podcast episodes when massive
waves of Chinese from north of the
Yellow River fled to the south and for
those that kept on going until you
couldn't go any further south they ended
up in Hong Kong these became known as
the five great clans and folks they're
still around today you have the hull
done Poong lu and mun clans in mandarin
that would be Ho Dong Poong Liao and
when these are the original hong kong
people in recorded history starts with
them they are today known as the punty
PU n TI or one day in cantonese or
pudding day in bad Cantonese Mandarin of
course this is Bondi
it means native or of this land many of
these would day people today still hold
title to their lands so other than the
earliest unorganized settlers who plied
their trade and fishing diving for
pearls and you know from the salt biz
these boom day were the first Hong Kong
people in American history I guess we
say if you came over on the Mayflower in
1620 you know you're the first of the
first well the boom day our Hong Kong's
version of this although this all began
during the southern and northern
dynasties it was really during the
southern song and especially during the
year and dynasty that these five great
clans became firmly established but they
weren't the last they got there first
and established themselves and after
they were all set up and held proper
title to their lands and had organized
themselves
come the Hakka people in north of the
Yellow River as well as the Tanka from
Guangdong and the hot lo who originally
came from Fujian and spoke aha yin or
Fujian dialect these tonka and ha claw
worthy legendary boat people of Hong
Kong they lived the entirety of their
lives on their boats they called
themselves the so young yet or they are
in Mandarin and oshri Xiang yang the
people who lived on the water the tonka
people were sort of considered in a
class of their own not Han then we got
along with them and in fact these tonka
Hakka and hot lo used to sorta really
stick to their own kind more fiercely
than maybe you know other cultures today
there are over 50 million of these
people spread out across China Taiwan
Hong Kong and Southeast Asia this is a
group who has left a major mark on
Chinese history and I plan to explore
their world and their contributions to
Chinese history in another podcast the
Hakka people however they were
landlubbers and so they farmed the boom
they were there first and they got first
dibs on all the best lands so the Hakka
either ended up in the hills where land
was not terribly suited for agriculture
or they just rented lands from the boom
day that was the pecking order as far as
the earliest days of Hong Kong when
villages were thriving in the New
Territories as things began to
transition to China's golden ages during
the Tong and Song dynasties during the
Tong Hong Kong was a thriving center of
trade of the region there was you know
still the lucrative salt trade as well
as fishing and pearl diving there was
you know stuff going on all over the new
territories and on Lantau Island if you
head over to Jos house Bay which is
located in the easternmost portion of
Hong Kong not too far from clear water
Bay you can still see today the earliest
references carved in stone dated 1274 ad
the time of the southern song there's a
hundred and eight characters carved into
the solid rock that tells about some
mundane visit by some visiting
government of fish
and a couple other happenings at the
time and it's this rock inscription that
remains the oldest historical relic
existing today in Hong Kong when the
Jurchens
booted the Song Dynasty out of Haiphong
you recall they ended up reconstituting
themselves down in the south and
hangzhou or leaned on more accurately
and when they met their end in the mid
to late 12 70s Hong Kong made it into
the history books if you recall from chp
episode 29 1276 the Mongols were
sweeping in from the north and the song
Emperor's advisors tell them that you
know we better vacate so they end up
setting up a temporary Court in Fujian
then the Mongols chased them out of food
Joe and this 10 year old boy Emperor and
his minder Lucio foo they board a vessel
and they head south along the coast
Guangdong province Liu shofu in this
little song dynasty emperor end up in
none other than Lantau Island in silver
mine Bay or Mui WA or may walk in
Mandarin afterwards this government in
exile moved to Kowloon city for a spell
this boy Emperor the Duan song Emperor
he gets sick and dies 1278 his brother
chopping he claims the honor of being
the final Emperor of the Song Dynasty
that was created in 960 AD by his great
ancestor jal Quan Yin he dies aged 8 on
March 19 1279 just north of Hong Kong
somewhere in the Pearl River estuary
again the details are all in Ch p29 un
dynasty plenty going on in Hong Kong
people started pouring in can't get any
further south than Hong Kong and people
were scattering in the wake of the
Mongol invasion I'm sure you are all
following Dan Carlin's fantastic series
the wrath of the cons it's here in the
late 13th and the 14th century the clans
really spread out in the New Territories
and it's here during the Yuan Dynasty
that Hong Kong first became permanently
settled people lived on their boats and
along the coast but now Hong Kong
farming and agricultural going on at the
same time now this may have been
subsistence farming but it was still
another step forward in the territories
development Hong Kong still had a way to
go when the dynasty exited stage left
and the main dynasty began in 1368 this
is when things began to gel to a certain
extent we all remember from the early
Ming that this is an age of discovery on
the high seas and Europeans begin
showing up in the 16th century
Jorge Alvarez officially became the
first Westerner to land in Hong Kong
doing so into a moon in 1512 and 1513
where he was part of a Portuguese
military settlement base there it was
scouting around for trade opportunities
and this yet to be explored region Macau
was still a little more than four
decades away they didn't stay in Hong
Kong for too long and were ultimately
chased out by the Ming Dynasty troops by
the Ming Dynasty you already had about
fifteen sixteen thousand people residing
in Hong Kong you know which hardly made
it the Barren Island with hardly a house
upon it as Henry John temple third by
count Palmerston famously said almost
three hundred years later and we're
gonna lay down our tools here and call
it a day starting with the next episode
we'll look at Hong Kong history in the
early Ching dynasty today's episode was
just about you know setting everything
up the main point I wanted to make was
that popular history tends to say Hong
Kong's history began with the Treaty of
Nanjing in 1842 and we could all see
although the star ferry hadn't started
service yet there was still plenty going
on and plenty of people from Guangdong
or you know who had come down from the
north and settled in Guangdong many
making their way to the southernmost
point to this future international
financial powerhouse we still have a
long row to hoe before we reached that
stage okay some housekeeping welcome to
all my new listeners who found me via
the history of world war ii podcast and
thanks to all of you sent me those
congratulations and
swishes via email on the occasion of my
hunter Thep asad there's a new china
history podcast in town go check this
one out
former BBC presenter Carrie Gracie with
the total resources of the BBC behind
her has a nice little podcast called
China as history is my witness so far
there are shows covering samat Chen
Kublai Khan the Duke of Joe and the
Tommy poets dual foo and Lee PI BBC
Radio 4 everything they do is pure
quality these are the chaps who bring us
Melvyn Bragg so go query that one in
iTunes and subscribe China as history is
my witness I'm leaving soon on a long
China trip and I don't think there are
gonna be any new China history podcast
until after I get back on November 4th
but we'll see you never know this is
Lazlo Montgomery once again and as usual
signing off from my little twin the town
of Claremont California we'll see you
next time I won't say when but it won't
be too long I hope take care everyone